STUDENT SOLUTION MANUAL
Student Solution Manual
Chapter 1
1 Figure 1.6 1: C; 2: F; 3: A; 4: B; 5: D; 6: E. The original hypothesis is incorrect, as the coffeemaker works when
plugged into the outlet. Alternative hypotheses include that the toaster might be broken or that the toaster wasn't turned
on. 3 Figure 1.16 Communities exist within populations which exist within ecosystems. 4 B 6 D 8 C 10 C 12 B 14
D 16 Answers will vary, but should apply the steps of the scientific method. One possibility could be a car which
doesn’t start. The hypothesis could be that the car doesn’t start because the battery is dead. The experiment would be
to change the battery or to charge the battery and then check whether the car starts or not. If it starts, the problem was
due to the battery, and the hypothesis is accepted. 18 Answers will vary. Topics that fall inside the area of biological
study include how diseases affect human bodies, how pollution impacts a species’ habitat, and how plants respond
to their environments. Topics that fall outside of biology (the “study of life”) include how metamorphic rock is formed
and how planetary orbits function. 20 Answers will vary. Layers of sedimentary rock have order but are not alive.
Technology is capable of regulation but is not, of itself, alive. 22 During your walk, you may begin to perspire, which
cools your body and helps your body to maintain a constant internal temperature. You might also become thirsty and
pause long enough for a cool drink, which will help to restore the water lost during perspiration.
Chapter 2
1 Figure 2.3 Carbon-12 has six neutrons. Carbon-13 has seven neutrons. 3 Figure 2.24 C 4 A 6 C 8 D 10
C 12 D 14 Ionic bonds are created between ions. The electrons are not shared between the atoms, but rather are
associated more with one ion than the other. Ionic bonds are strong bonds, but are weaker than covalent bonds,
meaning it takes less energy to break an ionic bond compared with a covalent one. 16 Buffers absorb the free
hydrogen ions and hydroxide ions that result from chemical reactions. Because they can bond these ions, they
prevent increases or decreases in pH. An example of a buffer system is the bicarbonate system in the human body.
This system is able to absorb hydrogen and hydroxide ions to prevent changes in pH and keep cells functioning
properly. 18 Carbon is unique and found in all living things because it can form up to four covalent bonds between
atoms or molecules. These can be nonpolar or polar covalent bonds, and they allow for the formation of long chains of
carbon molecules that combine to form proteins and DNA.
Chapter 3
1 Figure 3.5 Glucose and galactose are aldoses. Fructose is a ketose. 3 Figure 3.33 Adenine is larger than cytosine
and will not be able to base pair properly with the guanine on the opposing strand. This will cause the DNA to bulge.
DNA repair enzymes may recognize the bulge and replace the incorrect nucleotide. 4 C 6 A 8 D 10 B 12 D 14
C 16 B 18 C 20 C 21 Biological macromolecules are organic because they contain carbon. 23 Amino acids can
be linked into long chains through condensation reactions. One of the hydrogen atoms bonded to the nitrogen atom
of an amino acid reacts with the –OH group attached to the terminal carbon on another amino acid. Since both ends
of the molecule can participate in condensation reactions, peptide bonds can be made in both directions to create
a long amino acid chain. 25 The β 1-4 glycosidic linkage in cellulose cannot be broken down by human digestive
enzymes. Herbivores such as cows, koalas, and buffalos are able to digest grass that is rich in cellulose and use it as
a food source because bacteria and protists in their digestive systems, especially in the rumen, secrete the enzyme
cellulase. Cellulases can break down cellulose into glucose monomers that can be used as an energy source by
the animal. 27 Fat serves as a valuable way for animals to store energy. It can also provide insulation. Waxes can
protect plant leaves and mammalian fur from getting wet. Phospholipids and steroids are important components of
animal cell membranes, as well as plant, fungal, and bacterial membranes. 29 Fats have a higher energy density
than carbohydrates (averaging 9kcal/gram versus 4.3kcal/gram respectively). Thus, on a per gram basis, more energy
can be stored in fats than can be stored in carbohydrates. Additionally, fats are packaged into spherical globules
to minimize interactions with the water-based plasma membrane, while glycogen is a large branched carbohydrate
that cannot be compacted for storage. 31 A change in gene sequence can lead to a different amino acid being
added to a polypeptide chain instead of the normal one. This causes a change in protein structure and function.
For example, in sickle cell anemia, the hemoglobin β chain has a single amino acid substitution—the amino acid
glutamic acid in position six is substituted by valine. Because of this change, hemoglobin molecules form aggregates,
and the disc-shaped red blood cells assume a crescent shape, which results in serious health problems. 33 The
protein must form a channel in the plasma membrane that allows water into the cell since water cannot cross the
plasma membrane by itself. Since aquaporins are embedded in the plasma membrane and connect with both the
intracellular and extracellular spaces, it must be amphipathic like the plasma membrane. The top and bottom of the
protein must contain charged or polar amino acids (hydrophilic) to interact with the aqueous environments. The exterior
transmembrane region must contain non-polar amino acids (hydrophobic) that can interact with the phospholipid tails.
However, the inside of this channel must contain hydrophilic amino acids since they will interact with the traveling water
molecules.  35 The four types of RNA are messenger RNA, ribosomal RNA, transfer RNA, and microRNA. Messenger
RNA carries the information from the DNA that controls all cellular activities. The mRNA binds to the ribosomes that are
constructed of proteins and rRNA, and tRNA transfers the correct amino acid to the site of protein synthesis. microRNA
regulates the availability of mRNA for translation.
Chapter 4
1 Figure 4.7 Substances can diffuse more quickly through small cells. Small cells have no need for organelles and
therefore do not need to expend energy getting substances across organelle membranes. Large cells have organelles
that can separate cellular processes, enabling them to build molecules that are more complex.  3 Figure 4.18 It would
end up on the outside. After the vesicle passes through the Golgi apparatus and fuses with the plasma membrane, it
turns inside out.  4 C  6 D  8 D  10 B  12 D  14 A  16 C  18 D  20 D  22 C  24 D  25 A light microscope would be ideal
when viewing a small living organism, especially when the cell has been stained to reveal details.  27 A transmission
electron microscope would be ideal for viewing the cell’s internal structures, because many of the internal structures
have  membranes  that  are  not  visible  by  the  light  microscope.  29  The  cell  theory  states:
All  living  things  are
made  of  cells.;Cells  are  the  most  basic  unit  of  life.;New  cells  arise  from  existing  cells.  All  humans  are  multicellular
organisms whose smallest building blocks are cells. Adult humans begin with the fusion of a male gamete cell with
a  female  gamete  cell  to  form  a  fertilized  egg  (single  cell).  That  cell  then  divides  into  two  cells,  which  each  divides
into two more cells, and so forth until all the cells of a human embryo are made. As the embryo passes through all
the developmental stages to make an adult human, the cells that are added arise from division of existing cells.  31
Some  microbes  are  beneficial.  For  instance,  E.  coli  bacteria  populate  the  human  gut  and  help  break  down  fiber  in
the  diet.  Some  foods  such  as  yogurt  are  formed  by  bacteria.  33  Both  are  similar  in  that  they  are  enveloped  in  a
double membrane, both have an intermembrane space, and both make ATP. Both mitochondria and chloroplasts have
DNA, and mitochondria have inner folds called cristae and a matrix, while chloroplasts have chlorophyll and accessory
pigments in the thylakoids that form stacks (grana) and a stroma.  35 “Form follows function” refers to the idea that the
function of a body part dictates the form of that body part. As an example, compare your arm to a bat’s wing. While
the bones of the two correspond, the parts serve different functions in each organism and their forms have adapted
to follow that function.  37 Centrioles and flagella are alike in that they are made up of microtubules. In centrioles, two
rings of nine microtubule “triplets” are arranged at right angles to one another. This arrangement does not occur in
flagella.  39 A macrophage engulfs a pathogen by rearranging its actin microfilaments to bend the plasma membrane
around  the  pathogen.  Once  the  pathogen  is  sealed  in  an  endosome  inside  the  macrophage,  the  vesicle  is  walked
along microtubules until it combines with a lysosome to digest the pathogen.  41 They differ because plant cell walls
are rigid. Plasmodesmata, which a plant cell needs for transportation and communication, are able to allow movement
of really large molecules. Gap junctions are necessary in animal cells for transportation and communication.  43 E. coli
infections generally cause food poisoning, meaning that the invading bacteria cross from the lumen of the gut into the
rest of the body. Tight junctions hold the epithelial layer that lines the digestive tract together so that the material that
crosses into the body is tightly regulated. One way E. coli can avoid this regulation is to destroy the tight junctions so
that it can enter the body between the epithelial cells, rather than having to go through the cells.
Chapter 5
1 Figure 5.12 No, it must have been hypotonic as a hypotonic solution would cause water to enter the cells, thereby
making them burst.  3 Figure 5.19 A decrease in pH means an increase in positively charged H+ ions, and an increase
in the electrical gradient across the membrane. The transport of amino acids into the cell will increase.  4 A  6 A  8
C  10 A  12 D  14 D  16 B  18 C  20 B  21 The fluid characteristic of the cell membrane allows greater flexibility to
the  cell  than  it  would  if  the  membrane  were  rigid.  It  also  allows  the  motion  of  membrane  components,  required  for
some  types  of  membrane  transport.  23  Peripheral  proteins  can  bind  to  other  molecules  in  the  extracellular  space.
However, they cannot directly transmit a signal to the inside of the cell since they do not have a transmembrane domain
(region that goes through the plasma membrane to the inside of the cell). They must associate with integral membrane
proteins in order to pass the signal to the inside of the cell.  25 Water moves through a membrane in osmosis because
there is a concentration gradient across the membrane of solute and solvent. The solute cannot effectively move to
balance the concentration on both sides of the membrane, so water moves to achieve this balance.  27 Decreasing
temperature will decrease the kinetic energy in the system. A lower temperature means less energy in the molecules,
so  they  will  move  at  a  slower  speed.  Lowering  temperature  also  decreases  the  kinetic  energy  of  the  molecules  in
the plasma membrane, compressing them together. This increases the density of the plasma membrane, which slows
diffusion into the cell.  29 The cell harvests energy from ATP produced by its own metabolism to power active transport
processes, such as the activity of pumps.  31 Intestinal epithelial cells use active transport to fulfill their specific role as
the cells that transfer glucose from the digested food to the bloodstream. Intestinal cells are exposed to an environment
with fluctuating glucose levels. Immediately after eating, glucose in the gut lumen will be high, and could accumulate
in intestinal cells by diffusion. However, when the gut lumen is empty, glucose levels are higher in the intestinal cells. If
glucose moved by facilitated diffusion, this would cause glucose to flow back out of the intestinal cells and into the gut.
Active transport proteins ensure that glucose moves into the intestinal cells, and cannot move back into the gut. It also
ensures that glucose transport continues to occur even if high levels of glucose are already present in the intestinal
cells. This maximizes the amount of energy the body can harvest from food. 33 The proteins allow a cell to select
what compound will be transported, meeting the needs of the cell and not bringing in anything else.
Chapter 6
1 Figure 6.8 A compost pile decomposing is an exergonic process; enthalpy increases (energy is released) and
entropy increases (large molecules are broken down into smaller ones). A baby developing from a fertilized egg is
an endergonic process; enthalpy decreases (energy is absorbed) and entropy decreases. Sand art being destroyed
is an exergonic process; there is no change in enthalpy, but entropy increases. A ball rolling downhill is an exergonic
process; enthalpy decreases (energy is released), but there is no change in entropy. 3 Figure 6.14 Three sodium ions
could be moved by the hydrolysis of one ATP molecule. The ∆G of the coupled reaction must be negative. Movement
of three sodium ions across the membrane will take 6.3 kcal of energy (2.1 kcal × 3 Na+ ions = 6.3 kcal). Hydrolysis of
ATP provides 7.3 kcal of energy, more than enough to power this reaction. Movement of four sodium ions across the
membrane, however, would require 8.4 kcal of energy, more than one ATP molecule can provide. 4 C 6 C 8 B 10
A 12 A 14 C 16 Physical exercise involves both anabolic and catabolic processes. Body cells break down sugars
to provide ATP to do the work necessary for exercise, such as muscle contractions. This is catabolism. Muscle cells
also must repair muscle tissue damaged by exercise by building new muscle. This is anabolism. 18 A spontaneous
reaction is one that has a negative ∆G and thus releases energy. However, a spontaneous reaction need not occur
quickly or suddenly like an instantaneous reaction. It may occur over long periods due to a large energy of activation,
which prevents the reaction from occurring quickly. 20 The ant farm had lower entropy before the earthquake because
it was a highly ordered system. After the earthquake, the system became much more disordered and had higher
entropy. 22 The activation energy for hydrolysis is very low. Not only is ATP hydrolysis an exergonic process with a
large −∆G, but ATP is also a very unstable molecule that rapidly breaks down into ADP + Pi if not utilized quickly. This
suggests a very low EA since it hydrolyzes so quickly. 24 Feedback inhibition allows cells to control the amounts of
metabolic products produced. If there is too much of a particular product relative to the cell’s needs, feedback inhibition
effectively causes the cell to decrease production of that particular product. In general, this reduces the production of
superfluous products and conserves energy, maximizing energy efficiency.
Chapter 7
1 Figure 7.11 After DNP poisoning, the electron transport chain can no longer form a proton gradient, and ATP
synthase can no longer make ATP. DNP is an effective diet drug because it uncouples ATP synthesis; in other words,
after taking it, a person obtains less energy out of the food he or she eats. Interestingly, one of the worst side effects of
this drug is hyperthermia, or overheating of the body. Since ATP cannot be formed, the energy from electron transport
is lost as heat. 3 Figure 7.14 The illness is caused by lactate accumulation. Lactate levels rise after exercise, making
the symptoms worse. Milk sickness is rare today but was common in the midwestern United States in the early
1800s. 4 A 6 C 8 B 10 C 12 C 14 A 16 A 18 ATP provides the cell with a way to handle energy in an efficient
manner. The molecule can be charged, stored, and used as needed. Moreover, the energy from hydrolyzing ATP
is delivered as a consistent amount. Harvesting energy from the bonds of several different compounds would result
in energy deliveries of different quantities. 20 All cells must consume energy to carry out basic functions, such as
pumping ions across membranes. A red blood cell would lose its membrane potential if glycolysis were blocked, and
it would eventually die. 22 Q and cytochrome c are transport molecules. Their function does not result directly in ATP
synthesis in that they are not pumps. Moreover, Q is the only component of the electron transport chain that is not
a protein. Ubiquinone and cytochrome c are small, mobile electron carriers, whereas the other components of the
electron transport chain are large complexes anchored in the inner mitochondrial membrane. 24 Fermentation uses
glycolysis only. Anaerobic respiration uses all three parts of cellular respiration, including the parts in the mitochondria
like the citric acid cycle and electron transport; it also uses a different final electron acceptor instead of oxygen gas. 26
Citrate can inhibit phosphofructokinase by feedback regulation.
Chapter 8
1 Figure 8.6 Levels of carbon dioxide (a necessary photosynthetic substrate) will immediately fall. As a result, the rate
of photosynthesis will be inhibited. 3 Figure 8.18 D 4 A 6 B 8 B 10 A 12 C 14 A 16 D 18 C 20 C 21 The
outcome of light reactions in photosynthesis is the conversion of solar energy into chemical energy that the chloroplasts
can use to do work (mostly anabolic production of carbohydrates from carbon dioxide). 23 The energy carriers that
move from the light-dependent reaction to the light-independent one are “full” because they bring energy. After the
energy is released, the “empty” energy carriers return to the light-dependent reaction to obtain more energy. There
is not much actual movement involved. Both ATP and NADPH are produced in the stroma where they are also used
and reconverted into ADP, Pi, and NADP+. 25 The stomata regulate the exchange of gases and water vapor between
a leaf and its surrounding environment. When the stomata are closed, the water molecules cannot escape the leaf,
but the leaf also cannot acquire new carbon dioxide molecules from the environment. This limits the light-independent
reactions to only continuing until the carbon dioxide stores in the leaf are depleted.  27 Both of these molecules carry
energy; in the case of NADPH, it has reducing power that is used to fuel the process of making carbohydrate molecules
in light-independent reactions.  29 Because RuBP, the molecule needed at the start of the cycle, is regenerated from
G3P.  31 Because G3P has three carbon atoms, and each turn of the cycle takes in one carbon atom in the form of
carbon dioxide.  33 In the defined ecosystem, energy would radiate from the Sun, and be absorbed by the chlorophyll
in the leaves of the tree. Photosynthesis would occur in the leaves, transforming the light energy into stored chemical
energy in the covalent bonds of carbon molecules. The giraffe would eat the leaves of the tree, and digest the carbon
molecules  to  release  energy.  In  the  same  ecosystem,  nutrients  would  cycle  between  the  tree  and  the  giraffe.  The
giraffe would consume oxygen and release carbon dioxide as its cells perform aerobic respiration to create chemical
energy. The tree will consume the released carbon dioxide during photosynthesis to create its own stored chemical
energy, and release oxygen as a by-product.
Chapter 9
1 Figure 9.8  C.  The  downstream  cellular  response  would  be  inhibited.  3 Figure 9.17  C.  5  B  7  B  9  C  11  C  13
B  15 B  17 C  19 D  21 D  23 Intracellular signaling occurs within a cell, and intercellular signaling occurs between
cells.  25 Internal receptors are located inside the cell, and their ligands enter the cell to bind the receptor. The complex
formed by the internal receptor and the ligand then enters the nucleus and directly affects protein production by binding
to the chromosomal DNA and initiating the making of mRNA that codes for proteins. Cell-surface receptors, however,
are embedded in the plasma membrane, and their ligands do not enter the cell. Binding of the ligand to the cell-surface
receptor  initiates  a  cell  signaling  cascade  and  does  not  directly  influence  the  making  of  proteins;  however,  it  may
involve the activation of intracellular proteins.  27 Insulin’s receptor is an enzyme-linked transmembrane receptor, as
can be determined from the “tyrosine kinase” in its name. This receptor is embedded in the plasma membrane, and
insulin binds to its extracellular (outer) surface to initiate intracellular signaling cascades. Normally, steroid hormones
cross the plasma membrane to bind with intracellular receptors. These intracellular hormone-receptor complexes then
interact directly with DNA to regulate transcription. This limits steroid hormones to be small, non-polar molecules so
they can cross the plasma membrane. However, since insulin does not have to cross into the cell it could be large
or  polar  (it  is  a  small,  polar  molecule).  29  The  binding  of  the  ligand  to  the  extracellular  domain  would  activate  the
pathway normally activated by the receptor donating the intracellular domain.  31 If a kinase is mutated so that it is
always activated, it will continuously signal through the pathway and lead to uncontrolled growth and possibly cancer.
If a kinase is mutated so that it cannot function, the cell will not respond to ligand binding.  33 Possible explanations:
EGFR  dimer  cannot  separate.An  upstream  mutation  (in  Ras,  Raf,  MEK)  constitutively  activates  the  signaling
cascade.ERK has a mutation that prevents it from binding to its phosphatase.The cell has a mutation preventing the
expression or function of the ERK-specific phosphatase.  35 Multicellular organisms must coordinate many different
events in different cell types that may be very distant from each other. Single-celled organisms are only concerned with
their immediate environment and the presence of other cells in the area.
Chapter 10
the
therefore  prevent
1  Figure  10.14  Rb  and  other  negative  regulatory  proteins  control  cell  division  and
formation  of  tumors.  Mutations  that  prevent  these  proteins  from  carrying  out  their  function  can  result  in
cancer.  3  D. E6 binding marks p53 for degradation.  4 B  6 D  8 D  10 B  12 C  14 A  16 A  18 D  20 C  22 C  24 D
26 C  28 Human somatic cells have 46 chromosomes: 22 pairs and 2 sex chromosomes that may or may not form a
pair.  This  is  the  2n  or  diploid  condition.  Human  gametes  have  23  chromosomes,  one  each  of  23  unique
chromosomes, one of which is a sex chromosome. This is the n or haploid condition.  30 The DNA double helix is
wrapped  around  histone  proteins  to  form  structures  called  nucleosomes.  Nucleosomes  and  the  linker  DNA  in
between  them  are  coiled  into  a  30-nm  fiber.  During  cell  division,  chromatin  is  further  condensed  by  packing
proteins.  32  The  mitotic  spindle  is  formed  of  microtubules.  Microtubules  are  polymers  of  the  protein  tubulin;
therefore,  it  is  the  mitotic  spindle  that  is  disrupted  by  these  drugs.  Without  a  functional  mitotic  spindle,  the
chromosomes will not be sorted or separated during mitosis.  The  cell  will  arrest  in  mitosis  and  die.  34  Many  cells
temporarily  enter  G0  until  they  reach  maturity.  Some  cells  are  only  triggered  to  enter  G1  when  the  organism
needs  to  increase  that  particular  cell  type.  Some  cells  only reproduce following an injury to the tissue. Some cells
never  divide  once  they  reach  maturity.  36  The  G1  checkpoint  monitors  adequate  cell  growth,  the  state  of  the
genomic  DNA,  adequate  stores  of  energy,  and  materials  for  S  phase.  At  the  G2  checkpoint,  DNA  is  checked  to
ensure that all chromosomes were duplicated and that there are no mistakes in newly synthesized DNA. Additionally,
cell  size  and  energy  reserves  are  evaluated.  The  M  checkpoint  confirms  the  correct  attachment  of  the  mitotic
spindle  fibers  to  the  kinetochores.  38  Cdk  must  bind  to  a  cyclin,  and  it  must  be  phosphorylated  in  the  correct
position  to  become  fully  active.  40  If  one  of  the  genes  that  produces  regulator  proteins  becomes  mutated,  it
produces a malformed,  possibly non-functional,  cell-cycle regulator, increasing the chance that more mutations will
be left unrepaired in the cell. Each subsequent generation of cells sustains more damage. The cell cycle can speed
up  as  a  result  of  the  loss  of  functional  checkpoint  proteins.  The  cells  can  lose  the  ability  to  self-destruct  and
eventually become “immortalized.”  42 Regulatory mechanisms that might be lost include monitoring of the quality
of  the  genomic  DNA,  recruiting  of  repair  enzymes,  and  the  triggering  of  apoptosis.  44  The  common  components  of
eukaryotic  cell  division  and  binary  fission  are  DNA  duplication,  segregation  of  duplicated  chromosomes,  and  division
of the cytoplasmic contents.
Chapter 11
1 Figure 11.9 Yes, it will be able to reproduce asexually.  2 C  4 D  6 A  8 C  10 B  12 D  14 D  16 A  18 C  19 During
the  meiotic  interphase,  each  chromosome  is  duplicated.  The  sister  chromatids  that  are  formed  during  synthesis  are
held  together  at  the  centromere  region  by  cohesin  proteins.  All  chromosomes  are  attached  to  the  nuclear  envelope
by  their  tips.  As  the  cell  enters  prophase  I,  the  nuclear  envelope  begins  to  fragment  and  the  proteins  holding
homologous chromosomes locate each other. The four sister chromatids align lengthwise, and a protein lattice called
the  synaptonemal  complex  is  formed  between  them  to  bind  them  together.  The  synaptonemal  complex  facilitates
crossover  between  nonsister  chromatids,  which  is  observed  as  chiasmata  along  the  length  of  the  chromosome.  As
prophase I progresses, the synaptonemal complex breaks down and the sister chromatids become free, except where
they  are  attached  by  chiasmata.  At  this  stage,  the  four  chromatids  are  visible  in  each  homologous  pairing  and  are
called a tetrad.  21 In metaphase I, the homologous chromosomes line up at the metaphase plate. In anaphase I, the
homologous  chromosomes  are  pulled  apart  and  move  to  opposite  poles.  Sister  chromatids  are  not  separated  until
meiosis  II.  The  fused  kinetochore  formed  during  meiosis  I  ensures  that  each  spindle  microtubule  that  binds  to  the
tetrad will attach to both sister chromatids.  23 The chromosomes of the individual cannot cross over during meiosis if
the individual cannot make recombination nodules. This limits the genetic diversity of the individual’s gametes to what
occurs  during  independent  assortment,  with  all  daughter  cells  receiving  complete  maternal  or  paternal  chromatids.
An  individual  who  cannot  produce  diverse  offspring  is  considered  less  fit  than  individuals  who  do  produce  diverse
offspring.  25  a.  Crossover  occurs  in  prophase  I  between  nonsister  homologous  chromosomes.  Segments  of  DNA
are  exchanged  between  maternally  derived  and  paternally  derived  chromosomes,  and  new  gene  combinations  are
formed.  b.  Random  alignment  during  metaphase  I  leads  to  gametes  that  have  a  mixture  of  maternal  and  paternal
chromosomes.  c.  Fertilization  is  random,  in  that  any  two  gametes  can  fuse.  27  Sexual  reproduction  increases  the
genetic  variation  within  the  population,  because  new  individuals  are  made  by  randomly  combining  genetic  material
from two parents. Because only fit individuals reach sexual maturity and reproduce, the overall population tends toward
increasing fitness in its environment. However, there is always a possibility that the random combination creating the
offspring’s  genome  will  actually  produce  an  organism  less  fit  for  the  environment  than  its  parents  were.  29  Haploid-
dominant  organisms  undergo  sexual  reproduction  by  making  a  diploid  zygote.  The  cells  that  make  the  gametes  are
derived from haploid cells, but the + and – mating types that produce the zygote are randomly combined. The zygote
also  undergoes  meiosis  to  return  to  the  haploid  stage,  so  multiple  steps  add  genetic  diversity  to  haploid-dominant
organisms.
Chapter 12
1 Figure 12.5 You cannot be sure if the plant is homozygous or heterozygous as the data set is too small: by random
chance, all three plants might have acquired only the dominant gene even if the recessive one is present. If the round
pea  parent  is  heterozygous,  there  is  a  one-eighth  probability  that  a  random  sample  of  three  progeny  peas  will  all  be
round.  3  Figure 12.12  Half  of  the  female  offspring  would  be  heterozygous  (XWXw)  with  red  eyes,  and  half  would  be
homozygous recessive (XwXw) with white eyes. Half of the male offspring would be hemizygous dominant (XWY) withe
red yes, and half would be hemizygous recessive (XwY) with white eyes.  5 A  7 B  9 C  11 C  13 D  15 D  17 A  19
D  21 D  22 The garden pea is sessile and has flowers that close tightly during self-pollination. These features help to
prevent  accidental  or  unintentional  fertilizations  that  could  have  diminished  the  accuracy  of  Mendel’s  data.  24  Since
we  are  calculating  the  probability  of  two  independent  events  occurring  simultaneously,  we  use  the  product  rule.  F1
generation: Since green seed color is recessive, there is a 0% probability that any plants in the F1 generation will have
green, round seeds. F2 generation: The probability of growing an F2 generation plant with green seeds is ¼, while the
probability of growing an F2 generation plant with round seeds is ¾. We can use the product rule to then calculate the
probability  of  a  plant  with  green,  round  seeds:  1 /  4×3 /  4 = 3 /  16  26  Because  axial  is  dominant,  the  gene(12.3)
would be designated as A. F1 would be all heterozygous Aa with axial phenotype. F2 would have possible genotypes of
AA, Aa, and aa; these would correspond to axial, axial, and terminal phenotypes, respectively.  28 No, males can only
express  color  blindness.  They  cannot  carry  it  because  an  individual  needs  two  X  chromosomes  to  be  a  carrier.  30
Considering  each  gene  separately,  the  cross  at  A  will  produce  offspring  of  which  half  are  AA  and  half  are  Aa;  B  will
produce all Bb; C will produce half Cc and half cc. Proportions then are (1/2) × (1) × (1/2), or 1/4 AABbCc; continuing for
the other possibilities yields 1/4 AABbcc, 1/4 AaBbCc, and 1/4 AaBbcc. The proportions therefore are 1:1:1:1.  32 The
cross can be represented as a 4 × 4 Punnett square, with the following gametes for each parent: WY, Wy, wY, and wy.
For  all  12  of  the  offspring  that  express  a  dominant  W  gene,  the  offspring  will  be  white.  The  three  offspring  that  are
homozygous  recessive  for  w  but  express  a  dominant  Y  gene  will  be  yellow.  The  remaining  wwyy  offspring  will  be
green.  34 Mendelian inheritance would predict that all three genes are inherited independently. There are therefore 8
different  gamete  genotype  possibilities:  VYR,  VYr,  VyR,  Vyr,  vYR,  vYr,  vyR,  vyr.  If  all  three  genes  are  found  on  the
same chromosome arm, independent assortment is unlikely to occur because the genes are close together (linked).
Chapter 13
1 Figure 13.3 No. The predicted frequency of recombinant offspring ranges from 0% (for linked traits) to 50% (for
unlinked traits). 3 Figure 13.6 B. 4 A 6 C 8 B 10 C 12 D 14 The Chromosomal Theory of Inheritance proposed
that genes reside on chromosomes. The understanding that chromosomes are linear arrays of genes explained
linkage, and crossing over explained recombination.
Chapter 14
1 Figure 14.10 Compartmentalization enables a eukaryotic cell to divide processes into discrete steps so it can build
more complex protein and RNA products. But there is an advantage to having a single compartment as well: RNA
and protein synthesis occurs much more quickly in a prokaryotic cell. 3 Figure 14.21 If three nucleotides are added,
one additional amino acid will be incorporated into the protein chain, but the reading frame wont shift. 4 C 6 D 8
D 10 C 12 D 14 A 16 D 18 C 20 B 21 Live R cells acquired genetic information from the heat-killed S cells that
“transformed” the R cells into S cells. 23 If the tetranucleotide hypothesis were true, then DNA would have to contain
equal amounts of all four nucleotides (A=T=G=C). However, Chargaff demonstrated that A=T and G=C, but that the
four nucleotides are not present in equal amounts. 25 DNA has two strands in anti-parallel orientation. The sugar-
phosphate linkages form a backbone on the outside, and the bases are paired on the inside: A with T, and G with
C, like rungs on a spiral ladder. 27 Meselson’s experiments with E. coli grown in 15N deduced this finding. 29 At
an origin of replication, two replication forks are formed that are extended in two directions. On the lagging strand,
Okazaki fragments are formed in a discontinuous manner. 31 1333 seconds or 22.2 minutes. 33 Primer provides a
3'-OH group for DNA pol to start adding nucleotides. There would be no reaction in the tube without a primer, and no
bands would be visible on the electrophoresis. 35 Telomerase has an inbuilt RNA template that extends the 3' end, so
primer is synthesized and extended. Thus, the ends are protected. 37 This is a frameshift mutation with a deletion of
an “A” in the 12th position of the coding region.
Patient: ATGGGGATATGGCATNormal: ATGGGGATATGAGCAT
Chapter 15
1 Figure 15.11 No. Prokaryotes use different promoters than eukaryotes. 3 Figure 15.16 Tetracycline: a;
Chloramphenicol: c. 4 D 6 C 8 B 10 B 12 B 14 A 16 C 18 A 19 For 200 commonly occurring amino acids,
codons consisting of four types of nucleotides would have to be at least four nucleotides long, because 44 = 256. There
would be much less degeneracy in this case. 21 Met Cys Arg Asn Ser Arg The first step to writing the amino acid
sequence is to find the start codon AUG. Then, the nucleotide sequence is separated into triplets: CU AUG UGU CGU
AAC AGC CGA UGA. We stop the translation at UGA because that triplet encodes a stop codon. When we convert
these codons to amino acids, the sequence becomes Met Cys Arg Asn Ser Arg. 23 Rho-dependent termination is
controlled by the rho protein, which tracks along behind the polymerase on the growing mRNA chain. Near the end
of the gene, the polymerase stalls at a run of G nucleotides on the DNA template. The rho protein collides with the
polymerase and releases mRNA from the transcription bubble. Rho-independent termination is controlled by specific
sequences in the DNA template strand. As the polymerase nears the end of the gene being transcribed, it encounters
a region rich in C–G nucleotides. This creates an mRNA hairpin that causes the polymerase to stall right as it begins
to transcribe a region rich in A–T nucleotides. Because A–U bonds are less thermostable, the core enzyme falls
away. 25 To determine that a RNA polymerase I mutation or deficiency is causing the defect in protein production,
the scientist would need to make observations that provide evidence that RNA polymerases II and III are working in
the cell. The observations eliminating RNA polymerase II as the defect could include:
Transcription of mRNAs
in the nucleus;Presence of processed mRNAs in the cytoplasm The observations eliminating RNA polymerase III
could include:
Isolation of small nuclear RNAs from the cell;Isolation of microRNAs from the cell;Transcription of
5S rRNA in the nucleus;Presence of tRNAs in the cytoplasm The observations implicating RNA polymerase I could
include:
A lack of functional ribosomes in the cytoplasm (RNA polymerase I or III);A lack of RNA polymerase
I  protein;RNA  polymerase  I  protein  is  non-functional  27  The  mRNA  would  be:  5'-AUGGCCGGUUAUUAAGCA-3'.
The protein would be: MAGY. Even though there are six codons, the fifth codon corresponds to a stop, so the sixth
codon would not be translated.  29 Original mRNA: 5’ –UGCC AUG GUA AUA ACA CAU GAG GCC UGA AC– 3’;
Translation:  Met  –  Val  –  Ile  –  Thr  –  His  –  Glu  –  Ala;  Mutated  mRNA:  5’  –UGCC  AUG  GUU  AAU  AAC  ACA  UGA
GGCCUGAAC– 3’; Translation: Met – Val – Asn – Asn – Thr; Insertion mutations can have dramatic effects on proteins
because they shift the reading frame for the codons. This changes the amino acids encoded by the mRNA, and can
introduce premature start or stop sites.
Chapter 16
1  Figure 16.5  Tryptophan  is  an  amino  acid  essential  for  making  proteins,  so  the  cell  always  needs  to  have  some
on  hand.  However,  if  plenty  of  tryptophan  is  present,  it  is  wasteful  to  make  more,  and  the  expression  of  the  trp
receptor is repressed. Lactose, a sugar found in milk, is not always available. It makes no sense to make the
enzymes necessary to digest an energy source that is not available, so the lac operon is only turned on when
lactose is present. 3 Figure 16.13 Protein synthesis would be inhibited. 4 D 6 D 8 D 10 A 12 C 14 B 16
D 18 C 20 B 22 C 23 Eukaryotic cells have a nucleus, whereas prokaryotic cells do not. In eukaryotic cells,
DNA is confined within the nuclear region. Because of this, transcription and translation are physically separated.
This creates a more complex mechanism for the control of gene expression that benefits multicellular organisms
because it compartmentalizes gene regulation. Gene expression occurs at many stages in eukaryotic cells, whereas
in prokaryotic cells, control of gene expression only occurs at the transcriptional level. This allows for greater control
of gene expression in eukaryotes and more complex systems to be developed. Because of this, different cell types
can arise in an individual organism. 25 Environmental stimuli can increase or induce transcription in prokaryotic
cells. In this example, lactose in the environment will induce the transcription of the lac operon, but only if glucose
is not available in the environment. 27 You can create medications that reverse the epigenetic processes (to add
histone acetylation marks or to remove DNA methylation) and create an open chromosomal configuration. 29 Histone
acetylation reduces the positive charge of histone proteins, loosening the DNA wrapped around the histones. This
looser DNA can then interact with transcription factors to express genes found in that region. Normally, once the
gene is no longer needed, histone deacetylase enzymes remove the acetyl groups from histones so that the DNA
becomes tightly wound and inaccessible again. However, when there is a defect in HDAC9, the deacetylation may
not occur. In an immune cell, this would mean that inflammatory genes that were made accessible during an infection
are not tightly rewound around the histones. 31 If too much of an activating transcription factor were present, then
transcription would be increased in the cell. This could lead to dramatic alterations in cell function. 33 RNA binding
proteins (RBP) bind to the RNA and can either increase or decrease the stability of the RNA. If they increase the
stability of the RNA molecule, the RNA will remain intact in the cell for a longer period of time than normal. Since both
RBPs and miRNAs bind to the RNA molecule, RBP can potentially bind first to the RNA and prevent the binding of
the miRNA that will degrade it. 35 Because proteins are involved in every stage of gene regulation, phosphorylation
of a protein (depending on the protein that is modified) can alter accessibility to the chromosome, can alter translation
(by altering the transcription factor binding or function), can change nuclear shuttling (by influencing modifications to
the nuclear pore complex), can alter RNA stability (by binding or not binding to the RNA to regulate its stability), can
modify translation (increase or decrease), or can change post-translational modifications (add or remove phosphates
or other chemical modifications). 37 Environmental stimuli, like ultraviolet light exposure, can alter the modifications to
the histone proteins or DNA. Such stimuli may change an actively transcribed gene into a silenced gene by removing
acetyl groups from histone proteins or by adding methyl groups to DNA. 39 These drugs will keep the histone proteins
and the DNA methylation patterns in the open chromosomal configuration so that transcription is feasible. If a gene is
silenced, these drugs could reverse the epigenetic configuration to re-express the gene.
Chapter 17
1 Figure 17.7 B. The experiment would result in blue colonies only. 3 Figure 17.15 There are no right or wrong
answers to these questions. While it is true that prostate cancer treatment itself can be harmful, many men would rather
be aware that they have cancer so they can monitor the disease and begin treatment if it progresses. And while genetic
screening may be useful, it is expensive and may cause needless worry. People with certain risk factors may never
develop the disease, and preventative treatments may do more harm than good. 4 B 6 B 8 D 10 B 12 A 14 A 16
D 18 D 20 B 22 Southern blotting is the transfer of DNA that has been enzymatically cut into fragments and run on
an agarose gel onto a nylon membrane. The DNA fragments that are on the nylon membrane can be denatured to
make them single-stranded, and then probed with small DNA fragments that are radioactively or fluorescently labeled,
to detect the presence of specific sequences. An example of the use of Southern blotting would be in analyzing
the presence, absence, or variation of a disease gene in genomic DNA from a group of patients. 24 By identifying
an herbicide resistance gene and cloning it into a plant expression vector system, like the Ti plasmid system from
Agrobacterium tumefaciens. The scientist would then introduce it into the plant cells by transformation, and select
cells that have taken up and integrated the herbicide-resistance gene into the genome. 26 Genome mapping has
many different applications and provides comprehensive information that can be used for predictive purposes. 28
Metagenomics is revolutionary because it replaced the practice of using pure cultures. Pure cultures were used
to study individual species in the laboratory, but did not accurately represent what happens in the environment.
Metagenomics studies the genomes of bacterial populations in their environmental niche. 30 Proteomics has provided
a way to detect biomarkers and protein signatures, which have been used to screen for the early detection of cancer.
Chapter 18
1 Figure 18.14 Loss of genetic material
is almost always lethal, so offspring with 2n+1 chromosomes are more
likely to survive. 3 Figure 18.23 Answer B 4 B 6 D 8 A 10 B 12 C 14 D 16 C 17 The plants that can best use
the resources of the area, including competing with other individuals for those resources will produce more seeds
themselves and those traits that allowed them to better use the resources will increase in the population of the next
generation. 19 In science, a theory is a thoroughly tested and verified set of explanations for a body of observations of
nature. It is the strongest form of knowledge in science. In contrast, a theory in common vernacular can mean a guess
or speculation about something, meaning that the knowledge implied by the theory is very weak.  21 Organisms of
one species can arrive to an island together and then disperse throughout the chain, each settling into different niches
and exploiting different food resources to reduce competition.  23 The formation of gametes with new n numbers can
occur in one generation. After a couple of generations, enough of these new hybrids can form to reproduce together
as a new species.  25 If the hybrid offspring are as fit or more fit than the parents, reproduction would likely continue
between both species and the hybrids, eventually bringing all organisms under the umbrella of one species.
Chapter 19
1 Figure 19.2 The expected distribution is 320 VV, 160Vv, and 20 vv plants. Plants with VV or Vv genotypes would
have  violet  flowers,  and  plants  with  the  vv  genotype  would  have  white  flowers,  so  a  total  of  480  plants  would  be
expected to have violet flowers, and 20 plants would have white flowers.  3 Figure 19.8 Moths have shifted to a lighter
color.  4 C  6 D  8 C  10 A  12 D  14 A  16 p = (8*2 + 4)/48 = .42; q = (12*2 + 4)/48 = .58; p2  = .17; 2pq = .48; q2
= .34  18 Red is recessive so q2 = 200/800 = 0.25; q = 0.5; p = 1 - q = 0.5; p2 = 0.25; 2pq = 0.5. You would expect
200 homozygous blue flowers, 400 heterozygous blue flowers, and 200 red flowers.  20 The theory of natural selection
stems from the observation that some individuals in a population survive longer and have more offspring than others:
thus, more of their genes are passed to the next generation. For example, a big, powerful male gorilla is much more
likely than a smaller, weaker one to become the population’s silverback: the pack’s leader who mates far more than
the other males of the group. Therefore, the pack leader will father more offspring who share half of his genes and are
likely to grow bigger and stronger like their father. Over time, the genes for bigger size will increase in frequency in
the population, and the average body size, as a result, will grow larger on average.  22 The peacock’s tail is a good
example of the handicap principle. The tail, which makes the males more visible to predators and less able to escape,
is clearly a disadvantage to the bird’s survival. But because it is a disadvantage, only the most fit males should be able
to survive with it. Thus, the tail serves as an honest signal of quality to the females of the population; therefore, the
male will earn more matings and greater reproductive success.
Chapter 20
1 Figure 20.6  Cats and dogs are part of the same group at five levels: both are in the domain Eukarya, the kingdom
Animalia,  the  phylum  Chordata,  the  class  Mammalia,  and  the  order  Carnivora.  3  Figure 20.11  The  largest  clade
encompasses the entire tree.  4 C  6 D  8 C  10 B  12 C  14 A  16 The phylogenetic tree shows the order in which
evolutionary events took place and in what order certain characteristics and organisms evolved in relation to others.
It does not relate to time.  18 domain, kingdom, phylum, class, order, family, genus, species  20 Phylogenetic trees
are based on evolutionary connections. If an analogous similarity were used on a tree, this would be erroneous and,
furthermore, would cause the subsequent branches to be inaccurate.  22 Some hypotheses propose that mitochondria
were  acquired  first,  followed  by  the  development  of  the  nucleus.  Others  propose  that  the  nucleus  evolved  first  and
that this new eukaryotic cell later acquired the mitochondria. Still others hypothesize that prokaryotes descended from
eukaryotes by the loss of genes and complexity.
Chapter 21
1 Figure 21.5 D  3 Figure 21.10 C  4 B  6 D  8 A  10 B  12 D  14 D  16 A  18 D  20 C  22 Viruses pass through
filters that eliminated all bacteria which were visible in the light microscopes at the time. As the bacteria-free filtrate
could  still  cause  infections  when  given  to  a  healthy  organism,  this  observation  demonstrated  the  existence  of  very
small infectious agents. These agents were later shown to be unrelated to bacteria and were classified as viruses.  24
Rabies virus is a (-) strand RNA virus that transcribes mRNAs from its genome (Group V). HIV-1 is a single-stranded
RNA retrovirus that uses reverse transcriptase to create a double-stranded DNA copy of its genome which is integrated
into the host human’s genome prior to making mRNAs (Group VI). The genome structure system classifies both viruses
as single-stranded RNA viruses with linear genomes. Baltimore classification sorts Rabies virus and HIV-1 into two
different groups, indicating that the two viruses have very different life cycles. However, genome structure classification
does  not  distinguish  between  the  two  viruses.  This  leaves  out  important  information  regarding  virus  function  and
survival.  26  Reverse  transcriptase  is  needed  to  make  more  HIV-1  viruses,  so  targeting  the  reverse  transcriptase
enzyme may be a way to inhibit the replication of the virus. Importantly, by targeting reverse transcriptase, we do little
harm to the host cell, since host cells do not make reverse transcriptase. Thus, we can specifically attack the virus and
not the host cell when we use reverse transcriptase inhibitors.  28 Plant viruses infect crops, causing crop damage
and failure, and considerable economic losses.  30 Rabies vaccine works after a bite because it takes a week for the
virus to travel from the site of the bite to the central nervous system, where the most severe symptoms of the disease
occur. Adults are not routinely vaccinated for rabies for two reasons: first, because the routine vaccination of domestic
animals makes it unlikely that humans will contract rabies from an animal bite; second, if one is bitten by a wild animal
or a domestic animal that one cannot confirm has been immunized, there is still time to give the vaccine and avoid the
often fatal consequences of the disease.  32 This prion-based disease is transmitted through human consumption of
infected meat.  34 The botanist would need to isolate any foreign nucleic acids from infected plant cells, and confirm
that an RNA molecule is the etiological agent of disease. The botanist would then need to demonstrate that the RNA
can infect plant cells without a capsid, and that the RNA replicates, but is not translated to produce proteins.
Chapter 22
1 Figure 22.8 The extracellular matrix and outer layer of cells protects the inner bacteria. The close proximity of cells
also facilitates lateral gene transfer, a process by which genes such as antibiotic-resistance genes are transferred
from one bacterium to another. And even if lateral gene transfer does not occur, one bacterium that produces an
exo-enzyme that destroys antibiotic may save neighboring bacteria. 3 Figure 22.19 D 4 A 6 A 8 C 10 D 12
B 14 C 16 B 18 A 20 A 22 D 24 D 26 D 28 B 30 As the organisms are non-culturable, the presence could
be detected through molecular techniques, such as PCR. 32 Possible answers include:
PsychrophileHypolith –
survival in low humidity/water environment 34 Both bacteria and archaea have cell membranes and they both contain
a hydrophobic portion. In the case of bacteria, it is a fatty acid; in the case of archaea, it is a hydrocarbon (phytanyl).
Both bacteria and archaea have a cell wall that protects them. In the case of bacteria, it is composed of peptidoglycan,
whereas in the case of archaea, it is pseudopeptidoglycan, polysaccharides, glycoproteins, or pure protein. Bacterial
and archaeal flagella also differ in their chemical structure. 36 Responses will vary. In a deep-sea hydrothermal vent,
there is no light, so prokaryotes would be chemotrophs instead of phototrophs. The source of carbon would be carbon
dioxide dissolved in the ocean, so they would be autotrophs. There is not a lot of organic material in the ocean,
so prokaryotes would probably use inorganic sources, thus they would be chemolitotrophs. The temperatures are
very high in the hydrothermal vent, so the prokaryotes would be thermophilic. 38 Losing the bacteria that serve as
decomposers in the ecosystem would disrupt the carbon cycle, but not stop it completely since fungi can also serve
as decomposers. Without bacterial decomposers functioning, organic waste would accumulate in the area, and less
carbon dioxide would be released back into the atmosphere. 40 E. coli colonizes the surface of the leaf, forming a
biofilm that is more difficult to remove than free (planktonic) cells. Additionally, bacteria can be taken up in the water
that plants are grown in, thereby entering the plant tissues rather than simply residing on the leaf surface. 42 Soap
indiscriminately kills bacteria on skin. This kills harmful bacteria, but can also eliminate “good” bacteria from the skin.
When the non-pathogenic bacteria are eliminated, pathogenic bacteria can colonize the empty surface.
Chapter 23
1 Figure 23.5 All eukaryotic cells have mitochondria, but not all eukaryotic cells have chloroplasts. 3 Figure 23.28
C 4 D 6 C 8 C 10 D 12 B 14 A 16 C 18 D 20 A 22 B 23 Eukaryotic cells arose through endosymbiotic events
that gave rise to the energy-producing organelles within the eukaryotic cells such as mitochondria and chloroplasts.
The nuclear genome of eukaryotes is related most closely to the Archaea, so it may have been an early archaean
that engulfed a bacterial cell that evolved into a mitochondrion. Mitochondria appear to have originated from an
alpha-proteobacterium, whereas chloroplasts originated as a cyanobacterium. There is also evidence of secondary
endosymbiotic events. Other cell components may also have resulted from endosymbiotic events. 25 The ability to
perform sexual reproduction allows protists to recombine their genes and produce new variations of progeny that may
be better suited to the new environment. In contrast, asexual reproduction generates progeny that are clones of the
parent. 27 Protists are defined as any eukaryotes that do not fall into the Plantae, Fungi, or Animal Kingdoms. Since
the unifying characteristics describe what they are NOT, rather than what they are, Protista can include almost any
cellular/organism organization. Possible examples of structure variety:
Barrier to exterior world: cell wall, plasma
membrane, pellicleLocomotion: flagella, cilia, pseudopodia 29 By definition, an obligate saprobe lacks the ability to
perform photosynthesis, so it cannot directly obtain nutrition by searching for light. Instead, a chemotactic mechanism
that senses the odors released during decay might be a more effective sensing organ for a saprobe. 31 Possible
answers include:
Two nuclei (a macronucleus and a micronucleus) instead of one nucleusAmitotic division/binary
fission during asexual reproduction instead of mitotic cell divisionMitosis of the micronucleus after meiosis instead
of direct meiotic production of gametes for sexual reproduction 33 The trypanosomes that cause this disease are
capable of expressing a glycoprotein coat with a different molecular structure with each generation. Because the
immune system must respond to specific antigens to raise a meaningful defense, the changing nature of trypanosome
antigens prevents the immune system from ever clearing this infection. Massive trypanosome infection eventually
leads to host organ failure and death.
Chapter 24
1 Figure 24.14 A 3 Figure 24.21 Without mycorrhiza, plants cannot absorb adequate nutrients, which stunts their
growth. Addition of fungal spores to sterile soil can alleviate this problem. 4 C 6 D 8 C 10 B 12 B 14 C 16 C
18 C 20 B 22 A 23 Asexual reproduction is fast and best under favorable conditions. Sexual reproduction allows
the recombination of genetic traits and increases the odds of developing new adaptations better suited to a changed
environment. 25 Fungi break down decaying matter in their environment to serve as their food source. Since the
digestion occurs externally, the large mycelium can secrete exoenzymes over a large area. The fungi must be able to
absorb the small molecules released by digestion, so having a large surface area increases the amount of digested
molecules that are captured by the fungi. 27 Chytridiomycota (Chytrids) may have a unicellular or multicellular body
structure; some are aquatic with motile spores with flagella; an example is the Allomyces. Zygomycota (conjugated
fungi) have a multicellular body structure; features include zygospores and presence in soil; examples are bread and
fruit  molds.  Ascomycota  (sac  fungi)  may  have  unicellular  or  multicellular  body  structure;  a  feature  is  sexual  spores
in  sacs  (asci);  examples  include  the  yeasts  used  in  bread,  wine,  and  beer  production.  Basidiomycota  (club  fungi)
have  multicellular  bodies;  features  includes  sexual  spores  in  the  basidiocarp  (mushroom)  and  that  they  are  mostly
decomposers;  mushroom-producing  fungi  are  an  example.  29  The  bark  beetles  and  the  fungus  have  a  mutualistic
relationship since each partner benefits from interacting with the other. The beetle can provide food for its offspring,
while the fungus can spread to new trees.  31 Dermatophytes that colonize skin break down the keratinized layer of
dead cells that protects tissues from bacterial invasion. Once the integrity of the skin is breached, bacteria can enter the
deeper layers of tissues and cause infections.  33 The dough is often contaminated by toxic spores that float in the air.
It was one of Louis Pasteur’s achievements to purify reliable strains of baker’s yeast to produce bread consistently.
Chapter 25
1  Figure 25.6  B.  3  Figure 25.24  D.  4  A  6  C  8  C  10  C  12  D  14  A  16  B  18  D  20  D  22  D  24  Sunlight  is
not  filtered  by  water  or  other  algae  on  land;  therefore,  there  is  no  need  to  collect  light  at  additional  wavelengths
Climate: Deserts are more arid than
made available by other pigment coloration.  26 Possible challenges include:
swamps, so there is less humidity in the air and less water in the soil.Reproduction: Cactuses are often not densely
populated,  whereas  cattails  occur  in  groups.Temperature:  During  the  day,  deserts  are  usually  hot,  which  increases
the  risk  of  desiccation.  The  desert  climate  will  also  have  broader  temperature  ranges  (extremes).  28  It  allows  for
survival  through  periodic  droughts  and  colonization  of  environments  where  the  supply  of  water  fluctuates.  30  The
bryophytes are divided into three phyla: the liverworts or Hepaticophyta, the hornworts or Anthocerotophyta, and the
Sexual  reproduction  is  dependent  upon  water  in  which  the
mosses  or  true  Bryophyta.  32  Similarities  include:
male gamete swims.The haploid organism is the dominant part of the life cycle. Differences include:
Bryophyte
gametotangia  protect  the  gametes  and  the  growing  embryo.Bryophytes  make  sporangium  to  produce  spores.  34
Ferns are considered the most advanced seedless vascular plants, because they display characteristics commonly
observed in seed plants—they form large leaves and branching roots.
Chapter 26
1 Figure 26.8 B. The diploid zygote forms after the pollen tube has finished forming, so that the male generative nuclei
can fuse with the female gametophyte.  3 D  5 C  7 A  9 B  11 C  13 B  15 C  17 D  19 Both pollination and herbivory
contributed  to  diversity,  with  plants  needing  to  attract  some  insects  and  repel  others.  21  The  trees  are  adapted  to
arid  weather,  and  do  not  lose  as  much  water  due  to  transpiration  as  non-conifers.  23  The  resemblance  between
cycads and palm trees is only superficial. Cycads are gymnosperms and do not bear flowers or fruit. Cycads produce
cones: large, female cones that produce naked seeds, and smaller male cones on separate plants. Palms do not.  25
Using animal pollinators promotes cross-pollination and increases genetic diversity. The odds that the pollen will reach
another flower are greatly increased compared with the randomness of wind pollination.
Chapter 27
1 Figure 27.5 The animal might develop two heads and no tail.  3 Figure 27.9 D  4 B  6 D  8 B  10 C  12 D  14 B  16
C  18 D  19 The development of specialized tissues affords more complex animal anatomy and physiology because
differentiated tissue types can perform unique functions and work together in tandem to allow the animal to perform
more  functions.  For  example,  specialized  muscle  tissue  allows  directed  and  efficient  movement,  and  specialized
nervous tissue allows for multiple sensory modalities as well as the ability to respond to various sensory information;
these functions are not necessarily available to other nonanimal organisms.  21 Altered expression of homeotic genes
can lead to major changes in the morphology of the individual. Hox genes can affect the spatial arrangements of organs
and body parts. If a Hox gene was mutated or duplicated, it could affect where a leg might be on a fruit fly or how far
apart a person’s fingers are.  23 The evolution of bilateral symmetry led to designated head and tail body regions, and
promoted more efficient mobility for animals. This improved mobility allowed for more skillful seeking of resources and
prey escaping from predators. The appearance of the coelom in coelomates provides many internal organs with shock
absorption, making them less prone to physical damage from bodily assault. A coelom also gives the body greater
flexibility, which promotes more efficient movement. The relatively loose placement of organs within the coelom allows
them to develop and grow with some spatial freedom, which promoted the evolution of optimal organ arrangement.
The coelom also provides space for a circulatory system, which is an advantageous way to distribute body fluids and
gases.  25  In  many  cases,  morphological  similarities  between  animals  may  be  only  superficial  similarities  and  may
not indicate a true evolutionary relationship. One of the reasons for this is that certain morphological traits can evolve
along very different evolutionary branches of animals for similar ecological reasons.  27 It is true that multiple mass
extinction events have taken place since the Cambrian period, when most currently existing animal phyla appeared,
and the majority of animal species were commonly wiped out during these events. However, a small number of animal
species representing each phylum were usually able to survive each extinction event, allowing the phylum to continue
to evolve rather than become altogether extinct.
Chapter 28
1 Figure 28.3 B 3 Figure 28.45 C 4 B 6 B 8 C 10 A 12 B 14 D 16 C 18 B 20 D 22 A 24 Pinacocytes
are epithelial-like cells, form the outermost layer of sponges, and enclose a jelly-like substance called mesohyl. In
some sponges, porocytes form ostia, single tube-shaped cells that act as valves to regulate the flow of water into
the spongocoel. Choanocytes (“collar cells”) are present at various locations, depending on the type of sponge, but
they always line some space through which water flows and are used in feeding. 26 Nematocysts are “stinging cells”
designed to paralyze prey. The nematocysts contain a neurotoxin that renders prey immobile. 28 There are two key
differences between Porifera (sponges) and Cubozoans (box jellyfish) – gamete production and fertilization strategy.
Box jellyfish have separate sexes, while a single sponge can produce both types of gametes. Box jellyfish also undergo
internal fertilization, while sponges reproduce by external fertilization. Internal fertilization allows box jellyfish to control
which sperm is used for fertilization and increases the likelihood of ova and spermatozoa meeting. 30 Mollusks have
a large muscular foot that may be modified in various ways, such as into tentacles, but it functions in locomotion.
They have a mantle, a structure of tissue that covers and encloses the dorsal portion of the animal, and secrete the
shell when it is present. The mantle encloses the mantle cavity, which houses the gills (when present), excretory
pores, anus, and gonadopores. The coelom of mollusks is restricted to the region around the systemic heart. The
main body cavity is a hemocoel. Many mollusks have a radula near the mouth that is used for scraping food. 32
Cephalopods have a closed circulatory system, while other members of the Mollusca phylum have open circulatory
systems. Having a closed system allows blood to be moved more efficiently and rapidly through the animal, since the
circulation is not limited by diffusion. For example, this allows the octopus to have a much more complex body plan,
with branching tentacles, compared to a snail. In many cases, a closed circulatory system also allows the development
of larger organisms. 34 There are nematodes with separate sexes and hermaphrodites in addition to species that
reproduce parthenogentically. The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans has a self-fertilizing hermaphrodite sex and a
pure male sex. 36 The Arthropoda include the Hexapoda, which are mandibulates with six legs; the Myriapoda,
which are mandibulates with many legs and include the centipedes and millipedes; the Crustacea, which are mostly
marine mandibulates; and the Chelicerata, which include the spiders and scorpions and their kin. 38 Insects are
the predominant members of the subphylum Hexapoda. Advantages:
Pollination;Eliminate pests;Cheap food
source;Produce food products (ex. honey) Disadvantages:
Damage to food crops;Transmit disease to agricultural
workers;Contaminate/spoil food;Destroy buildings storing food crops
Chapter 29
1 Figure 29.3 A 3 Figure 29.24 The ancestor of modern Testudines may at one time have had a second opening in
the skull, but over time this might have been lost. 4 B 6 A 8 B 10 D 12 C 14 D 16 D 18 D 20 A 22 B 23 The
characteristic features of the phylum Chordata are a notochord, a dorsal hollow nerve cord, pharyngeal slits, and a
post-anal tail. 25 Comparison of hagfishes with lampreys shows that the cranium evolved first in early vertebrates, as
it is seen in hagfishes, which evolved earlier than lampreys. This was followed by evolution of the vertebral column, a
primitive form of which is seen in lampreys and not in hagfishes. 27 A moist environment is required, as frog eggs lack
a shell and dehydrate quickly in dry environments. 29 Frogs (Anura) begin their lives as tadpoles, organisms restricted
to an aquatic environment that use gills to breathe. After metamorphosis, most frogs develop lungs and lose their gills,
although they will also continue to perform gas exchange through their skin. The lungs of an adult frog allow the animal
to move out of the water, and become terrestrial. This limits competition between adults and tadpoles by opening
new living space and food sources to the adult. 31 Lizards differ from snakes by having eyelids, external ears, and
less kinematic skulls. 33 This is suggested by similarities observed between theropod fossils and birds, specifically
in the design of the hip and wrist bones, as well as the presence of a furcula, or wishbone, formed by the fusing of
the clavicles. 35 Ostriches and penguins are flightless birds, but ostriches are entirely terrestrial, while penguins dive
and swim in the ocean to find food. Therefore, penguins and flight birds like terns have similar chest structures with a
keel sternum and relatively large pectoral muscles (penguins use their wings to “fly” through water). Conversely, since
ostriches move by running, they do not have a keel to their sternum. They also have smaller pectoral muscles than
would be predicted for a flying bird their size, but have larger thigh muscles. 37 In some mammals, the cerebral cortex
is highly folded, allowing for greater surface area than a smooth cortex. The optic lobes are divided into two parts in
mammals. Eutherian mammals also possess a specialized structure that links the two cerebral hemispheres, called
the corpus callosum. 39 Archaic Homo sapiens differed from modern humans by having a thick skull and a prominent
brow ridge, and lacking a prominent chin.
Chapter 30
1 Figure 30.7 A and B. The cortex, pith, and epidermis are made of parenchyma cells. 3 Figure 30.34 B. 4 C 6 C 8
A 10 B 12 A 14 B 16 C 18 B 20 D 22 C 24 C 26 C 27 Lawn grasses and other monocots have an intercalary
meristem, which is a region of meristematic tissue at the base of the leaf blade. This is beneficial to the plant because
it can continue to grow even when the tip of the plant is removed by grazing or mowing. 29 Stomata allow gases
to enter and exit the plant. Guard cells regulate the opening and closing of stomata. If these cells did not function
correctly, a plant could not get the carbon dioxide needed for photosynthesis, nor could it release the oxygen produced
by  photosynthesis.  31  In  woody  plants,  the  cork  cambium  is  the  outermost  lateral  meristem;  it  produces  new  cells
towards the interior, which enables the plant to increase in girth. The cork cambium also produces cork cells towards
the exterior, which protect the plant from physical damage while reducing water loss.  33 Annual rings can also indicate
the climate conditions that prevailed during each growing season.  35 A tap root system has a single main root that
grows down. A fibrous root system forms a dense network of roots that is closer to the soil surface. An example of a
tap root system is a carrot. Grasses such as wheat, rice, and corn are examples of fibrous root systems. Fibrous root
systems are found in monocots; tap root systems are found in dicots.  37 Monocots have leaves with parallel venation,
and dicots have leaves with reticulate, net-like venation.  39 The process of bulk flow moves water up the xylem and
moves photosynthates (solutes) up and down the phloem.  41 Gravitropism will allow roots to dig deep into the soil to
find water and minerals, whereas the seedling will grow towards light to enable photosynthesis.  43 To prevent further
entry of pathogens, stomata close, even if they restrict entry of CO2. Some pathogens secrete virulence factors that
inhibit the closing of stomata. Abscisic acid is the stress hormone responsible for inducing closing of stomata.
Chapter 31
1 Figure 31.6 The air content of the soil decreases.  3 Figure 31.10 Soybeans are able to fix nitrogen in their roots,
which are not harvested at the end of the growing season. The belowground nitrogen can be used in the next season
by the corn.  4 C  6 A  8 D  10 B  12 B  14 A  16 Deficiencies in these nutrients could result in stunted growth, slow
growth, and chlorosis.  18 Answers may vary. Essential macronutrients include carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, nitrogen,
phosphorus,  potassium,  calcium,  magnesium,  and  sulfur.  Essential  micronutrients  include  iron,  manganese,  boron,
molybdenum,  copper,  zinc,  chlorine,  nickel,  cobalt,  sodium,  and  silicon.  20  Parent  material,  climate,  topography,
biological factors, and time affect soil formation. Parent material is the material in which soils form. Climate describes
how temperature, moisture, and wind cause different patterns of weathering, influencing the characteristics of the soil.
Topography affects the characteristics and fertility of a soil. Biological factors include the presence of living organisms
that greatly affect soil formation. Processes such as freezing and thawing may produce cracks in rocks; plant roots
can  penetrate  these  crevices  and  produce  more  fragmentation.  Time  affects  soil  because  soil  develops  over  long
periods.  22 Because it is natural and does not require use of a nonrenewable resource, such as natural gas.  24 A
nodule  results  from  the  symbiosis  between  a  plant  and  bacterium.  Within  nodules,  the  process  of  nitrogen  fixation
allows the plant to obtain nitrogen from the air.
Chapter 32
1 Figure 32.3 Pollen (or sperm); carpellate; staminate.  3 Figure 32.20 B  4 B  6 A  8 B  10 D  12 A  14 D  16 Inside
the flower are the reproductive organs of the plant. The stamen is the male reproductive organ. Pollen is produced in
the stamen. The carpel is the female reproductive organ. The ovary is the swollen base of the carpel where ovules
are  found.  Not  all  flowers  have  every  one  of  the  four  parts.  18  A  typical  flower  has  four  main  parts,  or  whorls:  the
calyx, corolla, androecium, and gynoecium. The outermost whorl of the flower has green, leafy structures known as
sepals, which are collectively called the calyx. It helps to protect the unopened bud. The second whorl is made up
of brightly colored petals that are known collectively as the corolla. The third whorl is the male reproductive structure
known as the androecium. The androecium has stamens, which have anthers on a stalk or filament. Pollen grains are
borne on the anthers. The gynoecium is the female reproductive structure. The carpel is the individual structure of the
gynoecium and has a stigma, the stalk or style, and the ovary.  20 Many seeds enter a period of inactivity or extremely
low metabolic activity, a process known as dormancy. Dormancy allows seeds to tide over unfavorable conditions and
germinate on return to favorable conditions. Favorable conditions could be as diverse as moisture, light, cold, fire, or
chemical treatments. After heavy rains, many new seedlings emerge. Forest fires also lead to the emergence of new
seedlings.  22 Asexual reproduction does not require the expenditure of the plant’s resources and energy that would
be involved in producing a flower, attracting pollinators, or dispersing seeds. Asexual reproduction results in plants that
are genetically identical to the parent plant, since there is no mixing of male and female gametes, resulting in better
survival. The cuttings or buds taken from an adult plant produce progeny that mature faster and are sturdier than a
seedling  grown  from  a  seed.  24  Plant  species  that  complete  their  life  cycle  in  one  season  are  known  as  annuals.
Biennials complete their life cycle in two seasons. In the first season, the plant has a vegetative phase, whereas in
the next season, it completes its reproductive phase. Perennials, such as the magnolia, complete their life cycle in two
years or more.
Chapter 33
1  Figure 33.11  A  3  Figure 33.23  Pyrogens  increase  body  temperature  by  causing  the  blood  vessels  to  constrict,
inducing shivering, and stopping sweat glands from secreting fluid.  4 A  6 C  8 D  10 D  12 C  14 D  16 D  18 A  20
B  22 C  24 A  26 B  28 A  29 Diffusion is effective over a very short distance. If a cell exceeds this distance in its size,
the center of the cell cannot get adequate nutrients nor can it expel enough waste to survive. To compensate for this,
cells can loosely adhere to each other in a liquid medium, or develop into multi-celled organisms that use circulatory
and respiratory systems to deliver nutrients and remove wastes.  31 In an open circulatory system, the heart(s) pump
blood into an open cavity, bathing the tissues. As the blood diffuses through the tissue space, it delivers nutrients in
exchange for receiving metabolic wastes. The blood then diffuses back to the heart to be pumped again. However,
since this system relies on diffusion, the size of animals that use an open circulatory system is limited to fairly small
volumes so that the blood can diffuse rapidly enough to efficiently exchange molecules with the tissues. 33 Squamous
epithelia can be either simple or stratified. As a single layer of cells, it presents a very thin epithelia that minimally
inhibits diffusion. As a stratified epithelia, the surface cells can be sloughed off and the cells in deeper layers protect
the underlying tissues from damage. 35 In multiple sclerosis, the immune system attacks the oligodendrocytes. The
death of oligodendrocytes results in the loss of the insulating sheath around the axon of the neurons. When the sheath
is gone, the electrical impulses travel much more slowly down the length of the axon. 37 An adjustment to a change
in the internal or external environment requires a change in the direction of the stimulus. A negative feedback loop
accomplishes this, while a positive feedback loop would continue the stimulus and result in harm to the animal. 39
Diabetes is often associated with a lack in production of insulin. Without insulin, blood glucose levels go up after a
meal, but never go back down to normal levels.
Chapter 34
1 Figure 34.11 B 3 Figure 34.19 C 4 D 6 C 8 B 10 D 12 C 14 A 16 B 18 B 20 Animals with a polygastric
digestive system have a multi-chambered stomach. The four compartments of the stomach are called the rumen,
reticulum, omasum, and abomasum. These chambers contain many microbes that breakdown the cellulose and
ferment the ingested food. The abomasum is the “true” stomach and is the equivalent of a monogastric stomach
chamber where gastric juices are secreted. The four-compartment gastric chamber provides larger space and the
microbial support necessary for ruminants to digest plant material. 22 Accessory organs play an important role in
producing and delivering digestive juices to the intestine during digestion and absorption. Specifically, the salivary
glands, liver, pancreas, and gallbladder play important roles. Malfunction of any of these organs can lead to disease
states. 24 The stomach and the teeth both perform mechanical digestion, which is physically (as opposed to
chemically) breaking the food into smaller components. This exposes a larger surface area for chemical digestion
and release of nutrients. The teeth are vital to mastication, which breaks large bites of food down into smaller pieces
that are easily swallowed. The stomach’s muscle contractions churn the food to expose all particles to the acid and
digestive enzymes. 26 Minerals—such as potassium, sodium, and calcium—are required for the functioning of many
cellular processes, including muscle contraction and nerve conduction. While minerals are required in trace amounts,
not having minerals in the diet can be potentially harmful. 28 Malnutrition, often in the form of not getting enough
calories or not enough of the essential nutrients, can have severe consequences. Many malnourished children have
vision and dental problems, and over the years may develop many serious health problems. 30 Fats are an essential
component of a healthy diet, and needed by the body to function. Fats are essential for many processes, including
the absorption of fat-soluble vitamins and production of some hormones. Fats also send a satiation signal to the brain
that regulates hunger. Without fats in their diets many people may have actually consumed more calories, which
would have resulted in weight gain. 32 The gut microbiome includes all the bacteria that aid in chemical digestion
in the intestines. Changing its composition can change the way that food is digested since not all bacteria have
the same macromolecule-digesting enzymes. Additionally, changes in gut microbiome can lead to the establishment
of pathogenic bacteria populations that cause inflammation in the gut or other disease. 34 Hormones control the
different digestive enzymes that are secreted in the stomach and the intestine during the process of digestion and
absorption. For example, the hormone gastrin stimulates stomach acid secretion in response to food intake. The
hormone somatostatin stops the release of stomach acid. 36 Somatostatin is the hormone that inhibits the release
of HCl
into the stomach lumen after the chyme has moved to the intestine. If the receptor for somatostatin is
nonfunctional, somatostatin cannot signal to the stomach parietal cells to stop acid secretion. Thus, acid secretion
will continue when there is no food present, and can cause damage to the stomach tissue. However, as long as the
stomach remains intact the mutation should not slow digestion since acid will always be present in the stomach to
digest any new boluses of food.
Chapter 35
1 Figure 35.3 B 3 Figure 35.26 D 4 C 6 B 8 B 10 C 12 D 14 B 16 C 18 A 20 C 22 D 24 Neurons contain
organelles common to all cells, such as a nucleus and mitochondria. They are unique because they contain dendrites,
which can receive signals from other neurons, and axons that can send these signals to other cells. 26 A single
axon means that a neuron can only send one signal at a time (one electrical impulse down the length of the axon).
However, since the axon has multiple terminals it can send the signal to several other cells at once. This ensures
that the signal is rapidly propagated to the rest of the body. 28 An action potential travels along an axon until it
depolarizes the membrane at an axon terminal. Depolarization of the membrane causes voltage-gated Ca2+ channels
to open and Ca2+ to enter the cell. The intracellular calcium influx causes synaptic vesicles containing neurotransmitter
to fuse with the presynaptic membrane. The neurotransmitter diffuses across the synaptic cleft and binds to receptors
on the postsynaptic membrane. Depending on the specific neurotransmitter and postsynaptic receptor, this action
can cause positive (excitatory postsynaptic potential) or negative (inhibitory postsynaptic potential) ions to enter the
cell.  30 To determine the function of a specific brain area, scientists can look at patients who have damage in that brain
area and see what symptoms they exhibit. Researchers can disable the brain structure temporarily using transcranial
magnetic stimulation. They can disable or remove the area in an animal model. fMRI can be used to correlate specific
functions  with  increased  blood  flow  to  brain  regions.  32  Potential  answers:
Frontal  lobe.  Alzheimer’s  patients
experience changes in personality, judgment, and behavior.;Parietal lobe. Alzheimer’s patients experience difficulties
with recalling and using language as disease progresses.;Temporal lobe. The hippocampus is one of the main areas of
the brain affected in Alzheimer’s disease. Patients lose the ability to make new memories and access memories.  34
The  sensory-somatic  nervous  system  transmits  sensory  information  from  the  skin,  muscles,  and  sensory  organs
to  the  CNS.  It  also  sends  motor  commands  from  the  CNS  to  the  muscles,  causing  them  to  contract.  36  Many
events in modern human life are not physical dangers; instead they are events we think of as “stress.” Finding the
money  to  pay  your  student  loans  or  being  nervous  before  a  test  still  activate  the  sympathetic  nervous  system,  but
these situations do not require the fight-or-flight response to survive.  38 Possible treatments for patients with major
depression include psychotherapy and prescription medications. MAO inhibitor drugs inhibit the breakdown of certain
neurotransmitters (including dopamine, serotonin, norepinephrine) in the synaptic cleft. SSRI medications inhibit the
reuptake of serotonin into the presynaptic neuron.
Chapter 36
1  Figure 36.5  D  3  Figure 36.18  A  4  B  6  A  8  B  10  B  12  A  14  B  16  D  18  B  20  B  22  D  24  Transmission  of
sensory information from the receptor to the central nervous system will be impaired, and thus, perception of stimuli,
which occurs in the brain, will be halted.  26 General sensory receptors are located throughout the body in the skin
and internal organs. Conversely, special senses are all located in the head region, and require specialized organs.
28 Pain is a subjective sensation that relies on the brain interpreting the nociception signals received by the sensory
receptors (perception). Therefore, even though two people experience identical stimuli, their brains can perceive them
as very different sensory experiences.  30 The animal might not be able to recognize the differences in food sources
and thus might not be able to discriminate between spoiled food and safe food or between foods that contain necessary
nutrients, such as proteins, and foods that do not.  32 The sound would slow down, because it is transmitted through
the particles (gas) and there are fewer particles (lower density) at higher altitudes.  34 The first step in processing a
sound in humans is the collection of sound by the pinna. When a person encounters a sound, the pinna on both sides
of the head will collect the vibrations. Since the waves originate from a single site, the two pinnae will not collect the
sound at the exact same time. When the sound is processed by the auditory system, the brain is able to use this slight
difference in timing to determine the location of the sound.  36 The photoreceptors tonically inhibit the bipolar cells,
and stimulation of the receptors turns this inhibition off, activating the bipolar cells.
Chapter 37
1  Figure 37.5  Proteins  unfold,  or  denature,  at  higher  temperatures.  3  Figure 37.14  Patient  A  has  symptoms
associated  with  decreased  metabolism,  and  may  be  suffering  from  hypothyroidism.  Patient  B  has  symptoms
associated with increased metabolism, and may be suffering from hyperthyroidism.  4 C  6 D  8 D  10 A  12 C  14
A  16 B  18 C  20 C  21 Although there are many different hormones in the human body, they can be divided into
three classes based on their chemical structure: lipid-derived, amino acid-derived, and peptide hormones. One of the
key distinguishing features of the lipid-derived hormones is that they can diffuse across plasma membranes whereas
the amino acid-derived and peptide hormones cannot.  23 Glucagon acts in opposition to insulin, the peptide hormone
that stimulates cells to take up glucose from the bloodstream, to maintain blood glucose within healthy levels. When
glucagon is released into the blood in response to falling blood sugar levels, the liver catabolizes its glycogen stores
to  release  glucose.  If  glucagon  does  not  function  properly,  the  blood  sugar  will  drop  too  low  from  insulin  signaling
driving cellular uptake from the blood.  25 Depending on the location of the protein receptor on the target cell and the
chemical structure of the hormone, hormones can mediate changes directly by binding to intracellular receptors and
modulating gene transcription, or indirectly by binding to cell surface receptors and stimulating signaling pathways.  27
In  addition  to  producing  FSH  and  LH,  the  anterior  pituitary  also  produces  the  hormone  prolactin  (PRL)  in  females.
Prolactin stimulates the production of milk by the mammary glands following childbirth. Prolactin levels are regulated
by the hypothalamic hormones prolactin-releasing hormone (PRH) and prolactin-inhibiting hormone (PIH) which is now
known to be dopamine. PRH stimulates the release of prolactin and PIH inhibits it. The posterior pituitary releases the
hormone oxytocin, which stimulates contractions during childbirth. The uterine smooth muscles are not very sensitive
to oxytocin until late in pregnancy when the number of oxytocin receptors in the uterus peaks. Stretching of tissues
in the uterus and vagina stimulates oxytocin release in childbirth. Contractions increase in intensity as blood levels of
oxytocin rise until the birth is complete.  29 The stressed patients that catch a cold must be chronically (long-term)
stressed. Long-term stress results in the production of glucocorticoids, such as cortisol. These hormones inhibit the
function of the immune system, which makes people more susceptible to infectious diseases.  31 The term humoral is
derived from the term humor, which refers to bodily fluids such as blood. Humoral stimuli refer to the control of hormone
release in response to changes in extracellular fluids such as blood or the ion concentration in the blood. For example,
a rise in blood glucose levels triggers the pancreatic release of insulin. Insulin causes blood glucose levels to drop,
which signals the pancreas to stop producing insulin in a negative feedback loop. Hormonal stimuli refer to the release
of a hormone in response to another hormone. A number of endocrine glands release hormones when stimulated by
hormones released by other endocrine organs. For example, the hypothalamus produces hormones that stimulate the
anterior pituitary. The anterior pituitary in turn releases hormones that regulate hormone production by other endocrine
glands. For example, the anterior pituitary releases thyroid-stimulating hormone, which stimulates the thyroid gland
to produce the hormones T3 and T4. As blood concentrations of T3 and T4 rise they inhibit both the pituitary and
the hypothalamus in a negative feedback loop. 33 The main mineralocorticoid is aldosterone, which regulates the
concentration of ions in urine, sweat, and saliva. Aldosterone release from the adrenal cortex is stimulated by a
decrease in blood concentrations of sodium ions, blood volume, or blood pressure, or an increase in blood potassium
levels. 35 Damage to the posterior pituitary gland would prevent the release of ADH and oxytocin into the body.
However, the hypothalamus’s ability to produce ADH would not be affected. The hypothalamus would also still be able
to produce and release inhibiting hormones to regulate the anterior pituitary.
Chapter 38
1 Figure 38.19B 3 Figure 38.38 In the presence of Sarin, acetycholine is not removed from the synapse, resulting in
continuous stimulation of the muscle plasma membrane. At first, muscle activity is intense and uncontrolled, but the
ion gradients dissipate, so electrical signals in the T-tubules are no longer possible. The result is paralysis, leading to
death by asphyxiation. 4 A 6 D 8 D 10 C 12 C 14 D 16 D 18 A 20 D 22 D 24 D 25 The female pelvis is tilted
forward and is wider, lighter, and shallower than the male pelvis. It also has a pubic angle that is broader than the male
pelvis. 27 Hydrostatic skeletons protect internal organs from harm by cushioning them from external shock. However,
these skeletons do not provide protection from external trauma. Exoskeletons are hard structures that protect the
organs from damage caused by their environment. However, since they are rigid, they provide little shock absorption,
so the animal will need to have other ways of cushioning its internal organs. 29 Compact bone tissue forms the
hard external layer of all bones and consists of osteons. Compact bone tissue is prominent in areas of bone at which
stresses are applied in only a few directions. Spongy bone tissue forms the inner layer of all bones and consists of
trabeculae. Spongy bone is prominent in areas of bones that are not heavily stressed or at which stresses arrive from
many directions. 31 Thalidomide effected the development of the long bones of the arms, disrupting endochondral
ossification. The bones would have been able to develop into a template made of the calcified cartilage matrix, but
new blood vessels could not be created. Since no vessels invade the template, the structure is not converted into
trabecular bone. 33 Elevation is the movement of a bone upward, such as when the shoulders are shrugged, lifting
the scapulae. Depression is the downward movement of a bone, such as after the shoulders are shrugged and the
scapulae return to their normal position from an elevated position. 35 Because ATP is required for myosin to release
from actin, muscles would remain rigidly contracted until more ATP was available for the myosin cross-bridge release.
This is why dead vertebrates undergo rigor mortis. 37 Neurons will not be able to release neurotransmitter without
calcium. Skeletal muscles have calcium stored and don’t need any from the outside.
Chapter 39
1 Figure 39.7 B 3 Figure 39.20 The blood pH will drop and hemoglobin affinity for oxygen will decrease. 4 A 6
B 8 D 10 B 12 D 14 C 16 The main bronchus is the conduit in the lung that funnels air to the airways where gas
exchange occurs. The main bronchus attaches the lungs to the very end of the trachea where it bifurcates. The trachea
is the cartilaginous structure that extends from the pharynx to the primary bronchi. It serves to funnel air to the lungs.
The alveoli are the sites of gas exchange; they are located at the terminal regions of the lung and are attached to the
respiratory bronchioles. The acinus is the structure in the lung where gas exchange occurs. 18 FEV1/FVC measures
the forced expiratory volume in one second in relation to the total forced vital capacity (the total amount of air that is
exhaled from the lung from a maximal inhalation). This ratio changes with alterations in lung function that arise from
diseases such as fibrosis, asthma, and COPD. 20 Oxygen moves from the lung to the bloodstream to the tissues
according to the pressure gradient. This is measured as the partial pressure of oxygen. If the amount of oxygen drops
in the inspired air, there would be reduced partial pressure. This would decrease the driving force that moves the
oxygen into the blood and into the tissues. PO2
at high elevations is lower
than at sea level because the total atmospheric pressure is less than atmospheric pressure at sea level. 22 Increased
airway resistance increases the volume and pressure in the lung; therefore, the intrapleural pressure would be less
negative and breathing would be more difficult. 24 The lung is particularly susceptible to changes in the magnitude
and direction of gravitational forces. When someone is standing or sitting upright, the pleural pressure gradient leads to
increased ventilation further down in the lung. 26 Carbon monoxide has a higher affinity for hemoglobin than oxygen.
This means that carbon monoxide will preferentially bind to hemoglobin over oxygen. Administration of 100 percent
oxygen is an effective therapy because at that concentration, oxygen will displace the carbon monoxide from the
hemoglobin.
is also reduced at high elevations: PO2
Chapter 40
1 Figure 40.10 C 3 Figure 40.17 Blood in the legs is farthest away from the heart and has to flow up to reach it. 4
A  6 C  8 C  10 C  12 A  14 A  16 A closed circulatory system is a closed-loop system, in which blood is not free in
a cavity. Blood is separate from the bodily interstitial fluid and contained within blood vessels. In this type of system,
blood circulates unidirectionally from the heart around the systemic circulatory route, and then returns to the heart.  18
Red blood cells are coated with proteins called antigens made of glycolipids and glycoproteins. When type A and type
B blood are mixed, the blood agglutinates because of antibodies in the plasma that bind with the opposing antigen.
Type  O  blood  has  no  antigens.  The  Rh  blood  group  has  either  the  Rh  antigen  (Rh+)  or  no  Rh  antigen  (Rh–).  20
Lymph capillaries take fluid from the blood to the lymph nodes. The lymph nodes filter the lymph by percolation through
connective tissue filled with white blood cells. The white blood cells remove infectious agents, such as bacteria and
viruses, to clean the lymph before it returns to the bloodstream.  22 The capillaries basically exchange materials with
their surroundings. Their walls are very thin and are made of one or two layers of cells, where gases, nutrients, and
waste are diffused. They are distributed as beds, complex networks that link arteries as well as veins.
Chapter 41
1 Figure 41.5 C  3 Figure 41.8 Loop diuretics decrease the excretion of salt into the renal medulla, thereby reducing
its osmolality. As a result, less water is excreted into the medulla by the descending limb, and more water is excreted
as urine.  4 B  6 A  8 B  10 C  12 D  14 C  16 C  18 Excretion allows an organism to rid itself of waste molecules that
could be toxic if allowed to accumulate. It also allows the organism to keep the amount of water and dissolved solutes
in balance.  20 The loop of Henle is part of the renal tubule that loops into the renal medulla. In the loop of Henle,
the filtrate exchanges solutes and water with the renal medulla and the vasa recta (the peritubular capillary network).
The vasa recta acts as the countercurrent exchanger. The kidneys maintain the osmolality of the rest of the body at a
constant 300 mOsm by concentrating the filtrate as it passes through the loop of Henle.  22 The removal of wastes,
which could otherwise be toxic to an organism, is extremely important for survival. Having organs that specialize in
this  process  and  that  operate  separately  from  other  organs  provides  a  measure  of  safety  for  the  organism.  24  It
is believed that the urea cycle evolved to adapt to a changing environment when terrestrial life forms evolved. Arid
conditions  probably  led  to  the  evolution  of  the  uric  acid  pathway  as  a  means  of  conserving  water.  26  Hormones
are small molecules that act as messengers within the body. Different regions of the nephron bear specialized cells,
which  have  receptors  to  respond  to  chemical  messengers  and  hormones.  The  hormones  carry  messages  to  the
kidney. These hormonal cues help the kidneys synchronize the osmotic needs of the body. Hormones like epinephrine,
norepinephrine, renin-angiotensin, aldosterone, anti-diuretic hormone, and atrial natriuretic peptide help regulate the
needs of the body as well as the communication between the different organ systems.
Chapter 42
1  Figure 42.11  C  3  Figure 42.16  If  the  blood  of  the  mother  and  fetus  mixes,  memory  cells  that  recognize  the  Rh
antigen can form late in the first pregnancy. During subsequent pregnancies, these memory cells launch an immune
attack on the fetal blood cells. Injection of anti-Rh antibody during the first pregnancy prevents the immune response
from occurring.  4 D  6 A  8 D  10 B  12 D  14 C  16 C  18 D  20 C  22 If the MHC I molecules expressed on donor
cells  differ  from  the  MHC  I  molecules  expressed  on  recipient  cells,  NK  cells  may  identify  the  donor  cells  as  “non-
self” and produce perforin and granzymes to induce the donor cells to undergo apoptosis, which would destroy the
transplanted organ.  24 An antigen is a molecule that reacts with some component of the immune response (antibody,
B  cell  receptor,  T  cell  receptor).  An  epitope  is  the  region  on  the  antigen  through  which  binding  with  the  immune
component actually occurs.  26 The TH1 response involves the secretion of cytokines to stimulate macrophages and
CTLs and improve their destruction of intracellular pathogens and tumor cells. It is associated with inflammation. The
TH2 response is involved in the stimulation of B cells into plasma cells that synthesize and secrete antibodies.  28 T
cells bind antigens that have been digested and embedded in MHC molecules by APCs. In contrast, B cells function
themselves as APCs to bind intact, unprocessed antigens.  30 Cross reactivity of antibodies can be beneficial when it
allows an individual's immune system to respond to an array of similar pathogens after being exposed to just one of
them. A potential cost of cross reactivity is an antibody response to parts of the body (self) in addition to the appropriate
antigen.
Chapter 43
1 Figure 43.8 D  3 Figure 43.17 B  4 A  6 D  8 A  10 A  12 C  14 A  16 A  18 C  20 D  22 A  24 B  26 B  28 D  30
D  31  Sexual  reproduction  produces  a  new  combination  of  genes  in  the  offspring  that  may  better  enable  them  to
survive changes in the environment and assist in the survival of the species.  33 External fertilization can create large
numbers  of  offspring  without  requiring  specialized  delivery  or  reproductive  support  organs.  Offspring  develop  and
mature quickly compared to internally fertilizing species. A disadvantage is that the offspring are out in the environment
and predation can account for large loss of offspring. The embryos are susceptible to changes in the environment,
which further depletes their numbers. Internally fertilizing species control their environment and protect their offspring
from predators but must have specialized organs to complete these tasks and usually produce fewer embryos.  35 In
phase one (excitement), vasodilation leads to vasocongestion and enlargement of erectile tissues. Vaginal secretions
are released to lubricate the vagina during intercourse. In phase two (plateau), stimulation continues, the outer third
of the vaginal wall enlarges with blood, and breathing and heart rate increase. In phase three (orgasm), rhythmic,
involuntary contractions of muscles occur. In the male, reproductive accessory glands and tubules constrict, depositing
semen in the urethra; then, the urethra contracts, expelling the semen through the penis. In women, the uterus and
vaginal muscles contract in waves that may last slightly less than a second each. In phase four (resolution), the
processes listed in the first three phases reverse themselves and return to their normal state. Men experience a
refractory period in which they cannot maintain an erection or ejaculate for a period of time ranging from minutes to
hours. Women do not experience a refractory period. 37 Negative feedback in the male system is supplied through
two hormones: inhibin and testosterone. Inhibin is produced by Sertoli cells when the sperm count exceeds set limits.
The hormone inhibits GnRH and FSH, decreasing the activity of the Sertoli cells. Increased levels of testosterone affect
the release of both GnRH and LH, decreasing the activity of the Leydig cells, resulting in decreased testosterone and
sperm production. 39 The first trimester lays down the basic structures of the body, including the limb buds, heart,
eyes, and the liver. The second trimester continues the development of all of the organs and systems established
during the first trimester. The placenta takes over the production of estrogen and high levels of progesterone and
handles the nutrient and waste requirements of the fetus. The third trimester exhibits the greatest growth of the fetus,
culminating in labor and delivery. 41 Multiple sperm can fuse with the egg, resulting in polyspermy. The resulting
embryo is not genetically viable and dies within a few days. 43 Organs form from the germ layers through the process
of differentiation. During differentiation, the embryonic stem cells express a specific set of genes that will determine
their ultimate fate as a cell type. For example, some cells in the ectoderm will express the genes specific to skin
cells. As a result, these cells will differentiate into epidermal cells. The process of differentiation is regulated by cellular
signaling cascades.
Chapter 44
1 Figure 44.10 Tropical lakes don’t freeze, so they don’t undergo spring turnover in the same way temperate lakes do.
However, stratification does occur, as well as seasonal turnover. 3 Figure 44.21 B. the photic zone, the intertidal zone,
the neritic zone, and the oceanic zone 4 B 6 D 8 D 10 D 12 C 14 Ecologists working in organismal or population
ecology might ask similar questions about how the biotic and abiotic conditions affect particular organisms and,
thus, might find collaboration to be mutually beneficial. Levels of ecology such as community ecology or ecosystem
ecology might pose greater challenges for collaboration because these areas are very broad and may include many
different environmental components. 16 Ocean upwelling is a continual process that occurs year-round. Spring and
fall turnover in freshwater lakes and ponds, however, is a seasonal process that occurs due to temperature changes
in the water that take place during springtime warming and autumn cooling. Both ocean upwelling and spring and fall
turnover enable nutrients in the organic materials at the bottom of the body of water to be recycled and reused by
living things. 18 Fire is less common in desert biomes than in temperate grasslands because deserts have low net
primary productivity and, thus, very little plant biomass to fuel a fire. 20 Bogs are low in oxygen and high in organic
acids. The low oxygen content and the low pH both slow the rate of decomposition. 22 Natural processes such as
the Milankovitch cycles, variation in solar intensity, and volcanic eruptions can cause periodic, intermittent changes in
global climate. Human activity, in the form of emissions from the burning of fossil fuels, has caused a progressive rise
in the levels of atmospheric carbon dioxide.
Chapter 45
1 Figure 45.2 Smaller animals require less food and other resources, so the environment can support more of them. 3
Figure 45.16 Stage 4 represents a population that is decreasing. 4 C 6 A 8 A 10 D 12 C 14 A 16 D 18 A 20
B 22 D 24 C 26 D 28 B 30 The researcher would mark a certain number of penguins with a tag, release them
back into the population, and, at a later time, recapture penguins to see what percentage of the recaptured penguins
was tagged. This percentage would allow an estimation of the size of the penguin population. 32 Parental care is not
feasible for organisms having many offspring because they do not have the energy available to take care of offspring.
Most of their energy budget is used in the formation of seeds or offspring, so there is little left for parental care. Also,
the sheer number of offspring would make individual parental care impossible. 34 In the first part of the curve, when
few individuals of the species are present and resources are plentiful, growth is exponential, similar to a J-shaped
curve. Later, growth slows due to the species using up resources. Finally, the population levels off at the carrying
capacity of the environment, and it is relatively stable over time. 36 If a natural disaster such as a fire happened in
the winter, when populations are low, it would have a greater effect on the overall population and its recovery than if
the same disaster occurred during the summer, when population levels are high. 38 Continued exponential human
population growth results in the human population requiring more resources to sustain itself. These resources are
usually taken at the expense of the environment and the organisms that rely on the resources in that environment
(e.g., habitat destruction for human development, water rerouting for irrigation, etc.). The continued use of fossil fuels
to generate power for human activities also contributes to climate change, changing climates in some areas so that
certain species can no longer survive there. 40 Jaguars are an apex predator in the Amazon, eating a variety of prey
animals and not serving as prey to any other predators. Through predation, they control the population sizes of the
smaller herbivores and omnivores. If jaguars were to disappear from the ecosystem, the smaller herbivore populations
would dramatically increase, and could overconsume the plant populations. 42 Animals that use aural or pheromone
signals to communicate with potential mates are able to signal over longer distances. Sound waves and chemicals
can diffuse out into an environment while visual cues require a direct line of sight between the sender and receiver.
Animals that use aural cues to acquire mates probably exhibit a lower population density than animals that use visual
cues.
Chapter 46
1 Figure 46.8  According to the first law of thermodynamics, energy can neither be created nor destroyed. Eventually,
all energy consumed by living systems is lost as heat or used for respiration, and the total energy output of the system
−) to nitrites
must equal the energy that went into it.  3 Figure 46.17 C: Nitrification by bacteria converts nitrates (NO3
−).  4 D  6 B  8 A  10 D  12 D  14 D  16 B  18 C  20 D  22 B  24 B  26 Food webs show interacting groups of
(NO2
different species and their many interconnections with each other and the environment. Food chains are linear aspects
of food webs that describe the succession of organisms consuming one another at defined trophic levels. Food webs
are a more accurate representation of the structure and dynamics of an ecosystem. Food chains are easier to model
and  use  for  experimental  studies.  28  Grazing  food  webs  have  a  primary  producer  at  their  base,  which  is  either  a
plant  for  terrestrial  ecosystems  or  a  phytoplankton  for  aquatic  ecosystems.  The  producers  pass  their  energy  to  the
various trophic levels of consumers. At the base of detrital food webs are the decomposers, which pass this energy to
a variety of other consumers. Detrital food webs are important for the health of many grazing food webs because they
eliminate dead and decaying organic material, thus, clearing space for new organisms and removing potential causes
of  disease.  By  breaking  down  dead  organic  matter,  decomposers  also  make  mineral  nutrients  available  to  primary
producers; this process is a vital link in nutrient cycling.  30 Conceptual models allow ecologists to see the “big picture”
of how different components of the ecosystem interact with each other, energy sources, and resources. However, this
approach is more descriptive than quantitative, so it is difficult to make conclusions about the resistance or resilience
of a system. Analytical modeling creates a model that can predict how the ecosystem’s relationships will change in
response to disturbances, but does not convey the complexity of the relationships seen with conceptual modeling.
32 NPE measures the rate at which one trophic level can use and make biomass from what it attained in the previous
level, taking into account respiration,  defecation,  and heat loss. Endotherms  have high metabolism and generate  a
lot of body heat. Although this gives them advantages in their activity level in colder temperatures, these organisms
are 10 times less efficient at harnessing the energy from the food they eat compared with cold-blooded animals, and
thus have to eat more and more often.  34 In this ecological model, the oak trees (producers) would be at the bottom,
the blue jays would be in the middle level (primary consumer of acorns), and the parasites would be at the top level
(secondary consumer). However, the pyramid would be inverted since each bird could support several parasites, and
each tree could support several birds. This pyramid would appear to be the opposite of the energy flow pyramid.  36
Many factors can kill life in a lake or ocean, such as eutrophication by nutrient-rich surface runoff, oil spills, toxic waste
spills, changes in climate, and the dumping of garbage into the ocean. Eutrophication is a result of nutrient-rich runoff
from land using artificial fertilizers high in nitrogen and phosphorus. These nutrients cause the rapid and excessive
growth of microorganisms, which deplete local dissolved oxygen and kill many fish and other aquatic organisms.  38
Human activity has greatly increased the amount of carbon dioxide gas in the Earth’s atmosphere. The oceanic and
atmospheric levels of carbon dioxide are linked so that when atmospheric carbon dioxide levels increase, the amount
of dissolved carbon dioxide in the ocean also increases (partial pressure of oxygen). When carbon dioxide dissolves in
water it produces the weak acid bicarbonate. Since the Industrial Revolution the pH of the ocean has dropped 0.1 pH
units, a 30% increase in acidity.
Chapter 47
1  Figure 47.6  A.  An  abundance  of  fern  spores  from  several  species  was  found  below  the  K-Pg  boundary,  but none
was found above.  3 B  5 C  7 C  9 B  11 D  13 C  15 D  17 The hypothesized cause of the K–Pg extinction event is
an asteroid impact. The first piece of evidence of the impact is a spike in iridium (an element that is rare on Earth,
but common in meteors) in the geological layers that mark the K–Pg transition. The second piece of evidence is an
impact crater off the Yucatán Peninsula that is the right size and age to have caused the extinction  event.  19 Crop
plants are derived from wild plants, and genes from wild relatives are frequently brought into crop varieties by plant
breeders to add valued characteristics to the crops. If the wild species are lost, then this genetic variation would no
longer be available.  21 Human population growth leads to unsustainable resource use, which causes habitat
destruction to build new human settlements, create agricultural fields, and so on. Larger human populations have also
led to unsustainable fishing and hunting of wild animal populations. Excessive use of fossil fuels also leads to global
warming.  23 Larger preserves  will  contain  more  species.  Preserves  should  have  a  buffer  around  them  to  protect
species  from  edge effects. Preserves that are round or square are better than preserves with many thin arms.
This OpenStax ancillary resource is © Rice University under a CC-BY 4.0 International license; it may be reproduced
or modified but must be attributed to OpenStax, Rice University and any changes must be noted.